>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY JUNE 4: TERROR IN
LONDON-- BRITAIN'S THIRD ATTACK
IN THREE MONTHS NOW UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
AND, UNDEREMPLOYMENT.
WHY SO MANY WORKING AMERICANS
CAN'T MAKE ENDS MEET.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BRITAIN REMAINS ON HIGH ALERT
FOLLOWING LAST NIGHT'S TERRORISM
ATTACK AT TWO LOCATIONS IN
CENTRAL LONDON.
THREE TERRORISTS KILLED SEVEN
PEOPLE, FIRST IN THE VAN ATTACK
ON PEDESTRIANS ON LONDON BRIDGE,
AND THEN STABBINGS AT
RESTAURANTS INSIDE THE NEARBY
BOROUGH MARKET.
HOSPITALS ARE TREATING ANOTHER
48 PEOPLE FOR INJURIES, 21 OF
THEM IN CRITICAL CONDITION.
POLICE SHOT AND KILLED THE THREE
ATTACKERS WITHIN EIGHT MINUTES
OF THE RESPONSE.
TODAY, POLICE ARRESTED AND
DETAINED 12 PEOPLE IN CONNECTION
WITH THE INVESTIGATION TO
ESTABLISH WHETHER OTHERS WERE
INVOLVED IN THE PLANNING OR
EXECUTION OF THE ATTACK.
LONDON'S NIGHT OF TERROR BEGAN
AROUND 10:00 P.M. LOCAL TIME
LAST NIGHT, WHEN A SPEEDING
WHITE VAN PLOWED INTO
PEDESTRIANS CROSSING THE CITY'S
ICONIC LONDON BRIDGE.
THE VAN THEN CRASHED INTO A BUS
STOP JUST OFF THE BRIDGE, WHERE
THREE SUSPECTS ARMED WITH KNIVES
GOT OUT AND RAN A SHORT DISTANCE
INTO THE POPULAR BOROUGH MARKET
RESTAURANT AND BAR DESTINATION,
SLASHING PEOPLE AT RANDOM.
CELL PHONE VIDEO INSIDE THE
MARKET SHOWS PANICKED CUSTOMERS
IN A PUB AS POLICE ARRIVE AND
TELL PATRONS TO GET ON THE
FLOOR.
WITHIN EIGHT MINUTES OF
RECEIVING THE FIRST EMERGENCY
CALL, POLICE OFFICERS HAD SHOT
AND KILLED ALL THREE SUSPECTS.
THIS PHOTO SHOWS ONE OF THE
SUSPECTS ON THE GROUND, WEARING
WHAT APPEARED TO BE A SUICIDE
BOMB VEST, WHICH TURNED OUT TO
BE FAKE.
AT 10 DOWNING STREET, AFTER
CHAIRING A CRISIS MEETING OF THE
SO-CALLED "COBRA COMMITTEE"
COMPRISED OF TOP INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIALS, BRITISH PRIME
MINISTER THERESA MAY CONDEMNED
THE ATTACK.
>> IT IS TIME TO SAY, ENOUGH IS
ENOUGH.
EVERYBODY NEEDS TO GO ABOUT
THEIR LIVES, AS THEY NORMALLY
WOULD.
OUR SOCIETY SHOULD CONTINUE TO
FUNCTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH OUR
VALUES.
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO TAKING ON
EXTREMISM AND TERRORISM, THINGS
NEED TO CHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHE ALSO SAID
THURSDAY'S NATIONAL ELECTIONS
WILL GO AHEAD AS SCHEDULED.
LONDON MAYOR SADIQ KHAN, WHO IS
MUSLIM, URGED LONDONERS TO
REMAIN CALM AND NOT BE ALARMED
BY THE LARGE POLICE PRESENCE ON
CITY STREETS.
>> THERE CAN BE NO JUSTIFICATION
FOR THE ACTS OF THESE
TERRORISTS.
AND I'M QUITE CLEAR THAT WE WILL
NEVER LET THEM WIN, NOR WILL WE
ALLOW THEM TO COWER OUR CITY OR
LONDONERS.
>> Sreenivasan: LONDONERS
EXPRESSED BOTH WORRY AND RESOLVE
TOWARD THE TERRORIST THREAT.
>> YOU GOTTA HAVE A BIT OF A--
MORE OF AN EYE OPEN NOW.
WHEREAS BEFORE, YOU COULD
CASUALLY WALK OUT, BUT NOW IT'S
A DAUNTING EXPERIENCE.
AND IT'S SCARY.
>> THERE'S A VERY STRONG FEELING
OF DEFIANCE AND ANGER.
"HOW DARE YOU?"
AND A REAL STRONG FEELING OF, WE
WILL CARRY ON.
>> Sreenivasan: SHORTLY AFTER
THE ATTACK, PRESIDENT TRUMP
OFFERED HIS SUPPORT TO PRIME
MINISTER MAY, BUT ALSO SEEMED TO
URGE THE SUPREME COURT TO BACK
HIS PROPOSED TRAVEL BAN ON
CITIZENS FROM SIX MOSTLY MUSLIM
COUNTRIES IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND
NORTH AFRICA.
HE TWEETED, "WE NEED TO BE
SMART, VIGILANT AND TOUGH.
WE NEED THE COURTS TO GIVE US
BACK OUR RIGHTS.
WE NEED THE TRAVEL BAN AS AN
EXTRA LEVEL OF SAFETY!"
TODAY, EVEN REPUBLICAN SENATORS
WERE SKEPTICAL OF THE BAN'S
RELEVANCE OR LEGALITY.
>> I THINK THE TRAVEL BAN IS TOO
BROAD, AND THAT IS WHY IT'S BEEN
REJECTED BY THE COURTS.
THE PRESIDENT IS RIGHT, HOWEVER,
THAT WE NEED TO DO A BETTER JOB
OF VETTING INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
COMING FROM WAR-TORN COUNTRIES
INTO OUR NATION, BUT I DO
BELIEVE THAT THE VERY BROAD BAN
THAT HE HAS PROPOSED IS NOT THE
RIGHT WAY TO GO.
>> Sreenivasan: THE LONDON
BRIDGE ATTACK WAS EERILY SIMILAR
TO THE ONE IN MARCH, WHEN A MAN
RAN OVER PEDESTRIANS ON
WESTMINSTER BRIDGE, KILLING FOUR
PEOPLE, AND THEN FATALLY STABBED
A POLICE OFFICER BEFORE POLICE
SHOT AND KILLED HIM.
THE BRIDGE AND MARKET ATTACKS
LAST NIGHT ALSO CAME LESS THAN
TWO WEEKS AFTER A SUICIDE BOMBER
KILLED 22 PEOPLE IN THE CITY OF
MANCHESTER FOLLOWING A CONCERT
BY POP STAR ARIANA GRANDE.
TODAY, WITH HEIGHTENED SECURITY,
GRANDE PERFORMED IN A PACKED
MANCHESTER SOCCER STADIUM, IN
TRIBUTE TO THE MANCHESTER ATTACK
VICTIMS AND TO RAISE MONEY FOR
THEIR FAMILIES.
GRANDE WAS JOINED BY FELLOW
MUSIC STARS COLDPLAY, MARCUS
MUMFORD, KATY PERRY, AND JUSTIN
BIEBER.
THE CONCERT IS EXPECTED TO RAISE
$2.5 MILLION.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM BRABANT
JOINS US NOW FROM LONDON, NOT
FAR FROM BOROUGH MARKET.
MALCOLM, THREE ATTACKS IN JUST A
FEW MONTHS TIME-- HOW IS THE
U.K, HOW IS LONDON COPING?
>> WELL, IF YOU TALK TO SOME
LONDONERS, THEY'LL PAINT A
PICTURE OF THE CITY BEING A
TOTALLY INDOMITABLE PLACE, A
PLACE THAT'S LIVED THROUGH THE
BLITZ, WITH GERMAN BOMBS RAINING
DOWN, WITH THE I.R.A. BOMBING
THIS PLACE DURING THE 1970s AND
1980s, AND THEY SAY THAT LONDON
CAN COPE.
BUT THAT'S ONLY SOME PEOPLE.
I THINK OTHERS ARE GENERALLY
FRAZZLED BY WHAT HAS HAPPENED.
THIS IS THE SECOND ATTACK IN THE
CITY WITHIN TWO MONTHS AND THERE
HAS BEEN A REAL ESCALATION, THE
SORT OF TERRORISM THAT TOOK
PLACE ON WESTMINSTER BRIDGE
MORPHED INTO THIS, IT BECAME
MORE EFFICIENT IN THE TERMS OF
THE ISLAMISTS.
AND PEOPLE HERE REALLY DON'T
KNOW WHAT TO EXPECT.
I WAS JUST TALKING TO A YOUNG
CHAPLAIN, HE SAYS WHENEVER HE
RUNS ACROSS THE BRIDGE HERE, HE
IS FORCED TO BE VIGILANT.
HE HAS TO LOOK TO SEE WHETHER
CARS ARE MOUNTING THE CURB.
AND HE ALSO HAS TWO CHILDREN.
AND HE AND HIS WIFE HAVE GOT TO
PLAN THAT, IF SOMETHING HAPPENS,
THEY'LL EACH GRAB A CHILD.
AND THIS IS THE WAY THAT PEOPLE
ARE HAVING TO THINK THESE DAYS,
BECAUSE THIS SORT OF ATTACK IS
BECOMING THE NEW NORMAL.
>> Sreenivasan: MALCOLM, YOU
WERE HEADING THERE FOR REPORTING
THIS WEEK, LEADING UP TO THE NEW
ELECTIONS, AND PERHAPS, PART
OF YOUR STORY WOULD HAVE BEEN
THE RIPPLE EFFECTS OF THE
MANCHESTER ATTACK, THAT HAPPENED
JUST A COUPLE WEEKS AGO.
NOW, HERE'S THIS CONVERSATION.
DOES THIS HAVE AN IMPACT ON
VOTERS WHEN THEY GO TO THE
POLLS?
>> I THINK IT IS GOING TO.
I MEAN, THE MANCHESTER ATTACK
HAPPENED TWO WEEKS AGO.
AND THEN PEOPLE WERE SAYING THAT
TERRORISM AND SECURITY WAS GOING
TO HAVE A SERIOUS IMPACT ON THE
ELECTIONS.
AND THEN OVER THE PAST COUPLE OF
WEEKS, IT'S GONE AWAY.
AND WHAT'S REALLY INTERESTING
ABOUT THIS IS THE WAY IN WHICH
THIS HAS BEEN PLAYING OUT FOR
THE INCUMBENT PRIME MINISTER,
THERESA MAY.
WHEN SHE CALLED THIS ELECTION,
SHE REALLY HAD A SUBSTANTIAL
LEAD, AND OVER THE COURSE OF THE
PAST FEW WEEKS, THAT LEAD HAS
BEEN DRAMATICALLY ERODED.
AND HER RIVAL,JEREMY CORBIN, WHO
IS WIDELY REGARDED AS BEING A
BIT OF A LEFT-WING CANDIDATE,
HAS DONE EXTREMELY WELL IN THE
POLLS.
AND SO MUCH SO, THAT HE CAME
WITHIN, YOU KNOW, A HAIR'S
BREATH OF HER IN THE LATEST
OPINION POLLS.
NOW, THIS INCIDENT HAPPENED ON
SATURDAY NIGHT, AND THAT REALLY
HAS CHANGED THE DYNAMIC OF THIS
ELECTION.
AND, IT HAS TO BE SAID-- IT MAY
BE TO MRS. MAY'S ADVANTAGE,
BECAUSE SHE WAS ONCE THE HOME
SECRETARY, AND PLAYING TO
SECURITY IS HER STRENGTH.
AND SO, SHE WAS ABLE TO PRESENT
HERSELF AS THE PRIME MINISTER
WHO IS ABLE TO TALK IN ROBUST
TERMS OUTSIDE DOWNING STREET,
AND THIS IS THE AREA WHERE THE
ELECTION IS GOING TO BE FOUGHT.
AND FOR TONIGHT, FOR EXAMPLE,
MR. CORBIN IS SAYING-- IS GOING
ON THE ATTACK, SAYING THAT THE
CONSERVATIVES HAVE DONE A REALLY
BAD JOB IN THE PAST BY--
LETTING THE PEOPLE DOWN BY
CUTTING THE NUMBER OF POLICE ON
THE BEAT, AND SO THIS IS AN AREA
WHICH IS REALLY GOING TO PLAY
INTO PEOPLE'S MINDS WHEN THEY GO
INTO THOSE VOTING BOOTHS ON
THURSDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MALCOLM BRABANT, JOINING US FROM
LONDON, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE VERY WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: TURNING NOW TO
ISSUES OF SECURITY FOLLOWING
LAST NIGHT'S ATTACK, I AM JOINED
FROM LONDON BY PETER NEUMANN, A
PROFESSOR AT KING'S COLLEGE
LONDON WHO IS ALSO WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR THE
STUDY OF RADICALIZATION AND
POLITICAL VIOLENCE.
PETER, MINISTER THERESA MAY SAID
THINGS ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
CHANGE-- WHAT HAS TO CHANGE?
>> SO, SHE DIDN'T ACTUALLY
ANNOUNCE ANY SPECIFIC MEASURES.
SHE SAID "ENOUGH IS ENOUGH," AND
SHE SAID WE HAVE TO FIGHT
AGAINST THE IDEOLOGY THAT SHE
DECLARED TO BE ISLAMIST
EXTREMISM, BUT SHE DIDN'T
OUTLINE ANY SPECIFIC ACTIONS
THAT COULD BE TAKEN.
AND I DON'T THINK THERE IS
NECESSARILY A LOT SHE CAN DO.
AS FAR AS KNOWN NETWORKS ARE
CONCERNED, I THINK THEY COULD
INTERVENE A LITTLE BIT EARLIER.
IN THE CASE OF MANCHESTER, FOR
EXAMPLE, ALL THE SUSPECTS WERE
KNOWN, THEY WERE KNOWN TO THE
AUTHORITIES, AND FOR SOME REASON
THEY WEREN'T ARRESTED, PROBABLY
BECAUSE THE AUTHORITIES THOUGHT
THEY WERE UNDER CONTROL AND THEY
WANTED TO WAIT AND OBSERVE A
LITTLE BIT LONGER.
I THINK THE THRESHOLD HAS BECOME
A LITTLE BIT LOWER AND THEY'RE
GOING TO INTERVENE EARLIER NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: GIVEN THE
THREE ATTACKS IN JUST A COUPLE
OF MONTHS HERE, DO THE SECURITY
FORCES, THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITIES, START TO TAKE
PROACTIVE MEASURES TO PREVENT
THIS?
>> ON THE WHOLE, THE BRITS HAVE
HAD A REPUTATION FOR BEING VERY
WELL POSITIONED-- THEY HAD A
GOOD STRATEGY.
THEY HAVE INVESTED VERY
CONSISTENTLY IN COUNTERTERRORISM
SINCE 2005, SINCE THE JULY 7
ATTACKS.
AND THEY HAVE A GREAT REPUTATION
IN EUROPE, SO IT'S GOING TO BE
VERY HARD FOR THEM TO LEVEL UP
AND TO MAKE GREAT IMPROVEMENTS,
BECAUSE, PERHAPS SOMEWHAT
OVERCONFIDENTLY, THEY BELIEVE
THEY ARE PRETTY GOOD ALREADY.
>> Sreenivasan: PRIME MINISTER
MAY ALSO CALLED FOR REGULATION
OF THE INTERNET AND SOCIAL MEDIA
AS A WAY TO TRY TO FIGHT THIS.
IS THIS POSSIBLE TO CONTAIN?
I MEAN, IN THE SENSE THAT IF IT
WAS NOT DIRECTED BY ISIS, LET'S
SAY IT WAS INSPIRED BY THEM.
HOW DO YOU STOP PEOPLE FROM
COMMUNICATING AND BEING INSPIRED
BY SOMETHING SO HORRIBLE?
>> I THINK IT'S VERY POLITICALLY
CONVENIENT FOR HER TO SAY THAT.
IT'S TRUE THAT IN 2014 THERE WAS
A MASSIVE PROBLEM ON MAINSTREAM
SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS LIKE
FACEBOOK AND TWITTER.
ALL THE JIHADISTS WERE BASICALLY
THERE, AND TRYING TO RADICALIZE
AND RECRUIT.
BUT THOSE MAINSTREAM SOCIAL
MEDIA PLATFORMS HAVE ACTED
SINCE.
SO, THE PROBLEM THAT WE HAVE
TODAY IS NO LONGER ONE OF
JIHADISTS BEING ON FACEBOOK AND
TWITTER, THEY ARE NO LONGER
THERE, THEY ARE ON PRIVATE
MESSAGING SERVICES LIKE TELEGRAM
WHICH ARE END-TO-END ENCRYPTED,
AND WHICH ARE MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO REGULATE.
>> Sreenivasan: PETER, HOW DO
U.S.-- I SHOULD SAY, THE U.K.
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES GET THEIR
ARMS AROUND SUCH A SIZABLE
POPULATION OF PEOPLE THAT
THEY'RE ALREADY CONCERNED ABOUT?
I'VE HEARD NUMBERS AS LARGE AS
3,000 PEOPLE, WHO ARE ACTIVELY
ENGAGED IN THE IDEOLOGY.
MAYBE 20,000 MORE PEOPLE
POST-9/11 THAT THEY'VE HAD
THEIR EYES ON.
>> OVER THE PAST FIVE OR SIX
YEARS, THE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE WHO
ARE SUPPOSED TO BE INVOLVED IN
VIOLENT EXTREMISM HAVE, IN SOME
CASES, QUADRUPLED, AND THE
CAPACITY OF MANY SECURITY
AGENCIES IS NO LONGER SUFFICIENT
TO MONITOR OR TO MANAGE THEM.
SO, THE GREATER THE NUMBERS
ARE-- IN BRITAIN, FOR EXAMPLE,
3,000 PEOPLE WHO ARE CONSIDERED
TO BE POTENTIALLY VIOLENT
EXTREMISTS-- THE GREATER AND THE
MORE DIFFICULT THE JUDGMENT
CALLS-- WHO DO YOU MONITOR, WHO
DO YOU ARREST, WHO DO YOU
CONSIDER TO BE DANGEROUS?
AND THE GREATER THE NUMBER, THE
MORE LIKELY IT IS THAT MISTAKES
ARE HAPPENING.
AND THIS COULD VERY WELL BE
WHAT'S CAUSED THE THREE ATTACKS
OVER THE PAST THREE MONTHS, IN
ENGLAND, THAT THE WRONG JUDGMENT
CALLS WERE MADE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
PETER NEUMANN OF KINGS COLLEGE,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE U.S.
ECONOMY OFFICIALLY ADDING
138,000 JOBS LAST MONTH, THE
NATION'S UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
DROPPED TO 4.3%, THE LOWEST RATE
SINCE 2001.
WHILE UNEMPLOYMENT IS ONE
INDICATOR OF ECONOMIC HEALTH, IT
ONLY MEASURES THOSE WHO ARE
ACTIVELY LOOKING FOR WORK OR
FILING UNEMPLOYMENT CLAIMS.
LEFT OUT ARE PEOPLE WORKING
PART-TIME OR FEWER HOURS THAN
THEY DESIRE-- THE UNDEREMPLOYED.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER REPORTS ON THIS SLICE OF
THE U.S. WORKFORCE.
THIS REPORT IS PART OF OUR
SERIES ON POVERTY AND ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA CALLED
"CHASING THE DREAM."
>> YOU DOING OKAY, MA'AM?
>> Reporter: LAYMONDRA BREWER-
THOMAS' WORK WASN'T ALWAYS THIS
STEADY.
BEFORE STARTING AS AN ASSISTANT
MANAGER AT THIS CHICAGO
WALGREENS, MAKING ENDS MEET
MEANT WORKING AN EXHAUSTIVE
NUMBER OF HOURS BETWEEN TWO
JOBS, ONE AT McDONALD'S, THE
OTHER AT WOMEN'S CLOTHING STORE
LANE BRYANT.
>> MY SCHEDULE WAS ALL OVER THE
PLACE.
BETWEEN 32 TO 40 HOURS WITH
McDONALD'S.
LANE BRYANT, I WANT TO SAY MAYBE
20 HOURS OUT OF THE WEEK.
SO I WAS JUGGLING BOTH JOBS AT
THE TIME.
IT WAS STRESSFUL.
IT WAS OVERWHELMING AT TIMES,
BECAUSE I WASN'T WHERE I WANTED
TO BE.
>> Reporter: BREWER-THOMAS' WORK
SITUATION EXEMPLIFIES A NEW
NORMAL FOR MILLIONS OF AMERICAN
WORKERS, UNDEREMPLOYMENT.
THE NATIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
HAS DROPPED FROM ITS GREAT
RECESSION PEAK OF 10% TO 4.3%.
BUT IF YOU INCLUDE PEOPLE WHO
HAVE STOPPED LOOKING IN THE LAST
MONTH OR THOSE INVOLUNTARILY
WORKING ONLY PART-TIME, YOU GET
THE NATION'S UNDEREMPLOYMENT
RATE.
IT WAS 17.1% AT THE PEAK OF THE
RECESSION.
TODAY IT IS AT 8.4%.
BOB BRUNO IS A LABOR AND
EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS PROFESSOR
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS.
>> WHILE IT'S TRUE THAT THE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE HAS BEEN
HALVED, AND THAT'S ALL TO THE
GOOD, TO SOME DEGREE IT REALLY
IS MASKING SOME REAL DIFFICULTY
THAT WORKERS ARE HAVING OUT
THERE IN THE ECONOMY.
>> Reporter: IN ILLINOIS, THE
UNDEREMPLOYMENT RATE IS ONE OF
THE HIGHEST IN THE COUNTRY,
AVERAGING 10.3% SINCE LAST YEAR.
THAT'S SOMETHING RONALD JACKSON
KNOWS ALL TOO WELL.
THE 54-YEAR-OLD, ILLINOIS NATIVE
FEELS HE HAS MANY MORE YEARS OF
WORK LEFT IN HIM-- THE PROBLEM
IS FINDING A COMPANY WILLING TO
GIVE HIM A FULL-TIME JOB.
HOW STABLE HAS IT BEEN FOR YOU?
>> NOT VERY STABLE, BECAUSE YOU
DON'T KNOW IF YOU WILL BE THERE
ONE MINUTE, OR THE NEXT, BECAUSE
THEY CAN SAY, "WELL, WE ONLY
NEED YOU FOR ONE WEEK."
AND MOST OF THE WORKERS DOESN'T,
THEY CAN'T PLAN.
THEY JUST HAVE TO GO DAY BY DAY,
AND HOPEFULLY THAT, YOU KNOW,
THEY'RE STILL WORKING.
>> Reporter: CURRENTLY OUT OF
WORK, JACKSON SPENT MUCH OF 2016
IN A PATCHWORK OF JOBS.
THIS PAST FALL, HE WAS WORKING
AT THIS PALLET SUPPLY COMPANY,
EARNING $350 EVERY WEEK, WITH NO
BENEFITS.
THAT JOB ENDED AFTER THREE
MONTHS.
>> MOST JOBS WON'T EVEN NOT HIRE
YOU FOR A FULL 40 HOURS.
THEY'LL GIVE YOU 25 HOURS.
AND WHO'S GONNA WANT TO WORK FOR
25 HOURS, AND THAT'S-- RIGHT
THERE IS BUS FARE, ALREADY GONE.
AFTER YOU TAKE OUT THE TAXES.
SO THERE'S NOT SAYING THAT
THERE'S JOBS OUT HERE.
WHERE?
I MEAN, PEOPLE WANNA WORK, BUT
IF I'MMA WORK, I NEED 40 HOURS.
>> PART-TIME USED TO BE
TEMPORARILY, AND IT USED TO BE A
GAUGE.
PEOPLE START BACK TO WORK PART
TIME.
IT BUILDS INTO FULL TIME.
PEOPLE WHO WANT FULL TIME CAN
FIND IT.
AND PEOPLE WHO STAY PART TIME
ARE VOLUNTARILY CHOOSING TO BE
IN THAT.
BUT WE'RE FINDING THAT'S NOT THE
REALITY ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: HOW DOES THIS
IMPACT THE ECONOMICS OF A
WORKING FAMILY?
>> THERE IS NOTHING BUT
INSECURITY.
THERE'S INSTABILITY, CONSTANTLY.
YOU CAN'T FEEL COMFORTABLE AT
ANY POINT IN TIME WITH THE HOURS
YOU'VE BEEN ASSIGNED OR THE
INCOME YOU'VE EARNED.
BECAUSE IT'S NEVER ENOUGH.
HOW A MIDDLE CLASS EMERGES OUT
OF THIS POPULATION REALLY IS AN
OPEN QUESTION.
>> Reporter: THAT QUESTION LED
LAYMONDRA BREWER-THOMAS TO
SKILLS FOR CHICAGOLAND'S FUTURE,
A PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
THAT WORKS WITH THE MORE THAN 50
CHICAGO AREA COMPANIES, LIKE
WALGREENS AND CHASE BANK, TO
FILL VACANCIES WITH QUALIFIED,
UNEMPLOYED, OR UNDEREMPLOYED JOB
SEEKERS.
MARIE LYNCH IS THE GROUP'S
C.E.O.
HOW COMMON IS LAYMONDRA'S STORY?
>> VERY COMMON.
ON AN ANNUAL BASIS , WE FIND
ABOUT 35% OF THE 1,100 PEOPLE WE
SERVE ARE UNDEREMPLOYED, THE
FOLKS WHO ARE EITHER NOT WORKING
FULL TIME OR ARE WORKING AT A
WAGE OR TYPE OF JOB THAT WAS
LESS THAN THEY PREVIOUSLY WERE
AT, PRIOR TO THE RECESSION.
>> Reporter: SHORTLY AFTER
CONNECTING WITH SKILLS FOR
CHICAGOLAND'S FUTURE, BREWER-
THOMAS GOT HER INTERVIEW WITH
WALGREENS.
TODAY, SHE'S RELIEVED TO BE
WORKING THERE FULL-TIME WITH
HEALTH CARE BENEFITS AND A
RETIREMENT PLAN, WITH THE GOAL
OF BECOMING A STORE MANAGER.
>> IT'S A LOT MORE CHALLENGING
NOW TO ACTUALLY FIND EMPLOYMENT
AND TO FIND EMPLOYMENT THAT MAY
BE BEST SUITED FOR YOUR NEEDS.
>> Reporter: DID YOU FEEL
BEFOREHAND THAT YOU HAD A JOBS
NETWORK OR AN EMPLOYMENT NETWORK
THAT YOU COULD TAP INTO?
>> NO.
IT WAS A STRUGGLE.
TALKING TO INDIVIDUALS I WENT TO
SCHOOL WITH AND ET CETERA, BUT
INDIVIDUALS I WENT TO SCHOOL
WITH, FRIENDS AND COLLEAGUES AND
ET CETERA, A LOT OF THEM WERE IN
THE SAME BOAT THAT I WAS IN AT
THE TIME, AND ARE STILL IN THE
SAME BOAT THAT I PREVIOUSLY WAS
IN.
>> Reporter: HAS THERE BEEN A
SYSTEMIC SHIFT IN THE WAY THAT
COMPANIES MANAGE THEIR
WORKFORCE?
IS THIS EMPHASIS ON A PART-TIME,
SCALABLE WORKFORCE SOMETHING
THAT'S SHIFTED WITHIN MANAGEMENT
THINKING?
>> I THINK THAT THERE HAS BEEN
SOME STRUCTURAL CHANGES TO HOW
THEY'RE APPROACHING WORK, YOU
KNOW?
AND TO, WHAT I SAW EARLY ON WAS,
REALLY AN ATTEMPT TO MANAGE RISK
AND TO BE CAUTIOUS AS THEY WERE,
YOU KNOW, COMING OUT OF THAT
RECESSION.
>> Reporter: FOR COMPANIES,
MANAGING RISK MEANS MANAGING
LABOR COSTS, INCLUDING THE
NUMBER OF HOURS PEOPLE WORK, AND
MANY COMPANIES HAVE ADOPTED
COMPUTER SOFTWARE TO HELP THEM
DO THAT.
>> MEANING YOUR MANAGERS REDUCE
UNNECESSARY OVERTIME, AND CREATE
SCHEDULES ALIGNED WITH BUDGETS.
>> Reporter: DAYFORCE IS A
PROGRAM USED BY ABOUT 3,500
COMPANIES, LIKE MAJOR RETAILERS
GUITAR CENTER AND SEPHORA.
JOHN ORR IS A SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT OF CERIDIAN, THE
COMPANY BEHIND THE SOFTWARE.
>> IT REALLY OPTIMIZES WHO THEY
PUT WHERE, WHEN, AND WHAT SKILLS
AND INFORMATION THEY NEED.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS DAYFORCE
ENABLES EMPLOYERS TO QUICKLY
RESPOND TO THE SHIFTS IN THEIR
RESPECTIVE MARKETS AND ADJUST TO
THEIR EMPLOYEES' NEEDS.
>> WHAT WE HAVE DONE IS WE HAVE
COME TO THE MARKET WITH DAYFORCE
THAT ALLOWS THE BUSINESS SIDE TO
OPTIMIZE ITS PEOPLE, IN PART-
TIME OR SHORTER HOUR INCREMENTS,
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, ALLOWS
THE EMPLOYEE TO GET THE HOURS.
IF THEY'RE ONLY ALLOWED TO GET
15 HOURS IN THIS LOCATION BUT
THEY CAN GET ANOTHER 15 HOURS AT
ANOTHER LOCATION, AND THE
EMPLOYEE WANTS THE 30 HOURS, OUR
SYSTEM IS SMART ENOUGH TO KNOW
HOW TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: THIS FLEXIBLE
SCHEDULING ABILITY CAME AS THE
RETAIL INDUSTRY-- WHICH EMPLOYS
OVER THREE MILLION PEOPLE IN
AMERICA-- HAS INCREASINGLY
RELIED ON PART-TIME WORKERS.
MARK COHEN USED TO BE THE C.E.O.
OF SEARS IN CANADA AND NOW IS AN
INDUSTRY CONSULTANT AND COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL
PROFESSOR.
>> YOU NEED SOMEBODY TO OPEN THE
DOOR IN THE MORNING, SOMEONE TO
LOCK THE DOOR AT NIGHT.
BUT YOU REALLY WANT TO STAFF
YOUR PHYSICAL SPACE WHEN THE
CUSTOMER'S SHOPPING, AND TO THE
DEGREE THAT FOLKS HAVE BEEN ABLE
TO PREDICT THAT, THAT'S BEEN THE
BASIS FOR INCREASED PART-TIME
EMPLOYMENT.
>> Reporter: IS THERE EVIDENCE
THAT PRODUCTIVITY INCREASES IF
YOU HAVE WORKERS THAT ARE, SAY,
WORKING AT 30 OR FEWER HOURS A
WEEK?
OR IS PRODUCTIVITY HIGHER IF
WORKERS ARE IN A FULL-TIME
CAPACITY?
>> SO, THIS IS A DIFFICULT,
DIFFICULT ISSUE.
THERE'S NO FORMULAIC SOLUTION.
THERE ARE ORGANIZATIONS THAT
HOLD THEIR FULL TIME EMPLOYEES
DEARLY.
AND SO THEY PAY THE PRICE OF A
DIP IN BUSINESS, AND THEY KEEP
THOSE FOLKS EMPLOYED.
THERE ARE OTHER FOLKS WHO TRACK
ON A MORE POINT-TO-POINT BASIS;
THEY FIRE AND HIRE, AND I THINK
THEY'RE PROBABLY CHARACTERIZED
AS PENNY WISE AND POUND FOOLISH.
THEY APPEAR TO BE OPERATING MORE
EFFICIENTLY, BUT THEY PAY AN
ENORMOUS COST IN HIRING,
RETRAINING AND TURNOVER.
>> Reporter: WITH RETAIL STORES
STRUGGLING AGAINST COMPETITION
FROM THE INTERNET, COHEN
PREDICTS INCREASED INSTABILITY
FOR THOSE EMPLOYED IN THE RETAIL
SECTOR.
>> SO, RIGHT NOW YOU CAN SHOP
ONLINE WITH A KEYBOARD, AND I
WOULD SAY IN A COUPLE OF YEARS
YOU'LL START SHOPPING ONLINE
WITH A HEADSET THAT LETS YOU
WALK THROUGH A STORE, WHETHER
IT'S REAL OR VIRTUAL, POINT TO
SOMETHING THAT INTERESTS YOU,
PICK IT UP VIRTUALLY AND THEN
DECIDE TO BUY IT.
>> Reporter: REALLY REPRESENTS A
DARK SHADOW FOR THE PERSON THAT
WORKS ON THE FLOOR OF A MALL OR
OF A CLOTHING STORE?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK, HAD
YOU NOT FOUND SKILLS FOR
CHICAGOLAND'S FUTURE, YOU WOULD
BE WHERE YOU ARE?
>> I'M NOT SURE.
I COULD STILL BE JUGGLING
BETWEEN TWO JOBS, OR STILL
ATTEMPTING TO FIND SOMETHING
THAT'S BETTER SUITED FOR MY
NEEDS AND WANTS, AND MY
CAREER PATH IN GENERAL.
SO I KNOW I WOULD KEEP PUSHING,
BUT, YOU KNOW, I'M NOT SURE.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEW APP IS
AIMED AT L.G.B.T.Q. CHRISTIANS
WHO FEEL EXCLUDED BY RELIGIOUS
INSTITUTIONS.
READ MORE AT pbs.org/newshour.
RETURNING TO OUR TOP STORY, THE
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANT GROUP,
ISIS, CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY
THIS EVENING FOR LAST NIGHT'S
TERRORIST ATTACK IN CENTRAL
LONDON THAT LEFT AT LEAST SEVEN
DEAD, IN ADDITION TO THE THREE
SUSPECTS.
A STATEMENT SAID THE ATTACK WAS
CARRIED OUT BY WHAT IT CALLED A
"DETACHMENT OF ISLAMIC STATE
FIGHTERS."
OFFICIALS IN BRITAIN HAVE NOT
VERIFIED THE AUTHENTICITY OF THE
CLAIM.
FORMER BASEBALL OUTFIELDER JIM
PIERSALL DIED THIS WEEKEND AT
THE AGE OF 87.
HE PLAYED 17 SEASONS IN THE
MAJOR LEAGUES, AND GAINED FAME
FOR MAKING HIS STRUGGLES WITH
MENTAL ILLNESS PUBLIC, IN A 1955
MEMOIR CALLED "FEAR STRIKES
OUT."
IT WAS LATER MADE INTO A MOVIE.
AND FINALLY, 31-YEAR-OLD ALEX
HONNOLD HAS BECOME THE FIRST
CLIMBER TO SCALE YOSEMITE
NATIONAL PARK'S 3,000-FOOT
"EL CAPITAN" ALONE, WITH NO
ROPES OR SAFETY GEAR.
"NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC," WHICH
DOCUMENTED THE CLIMB FOR ITS
FORTHCOMING FILM "SOLO," SAYS
HONNOLD MADE IT TO THE TOP IN
UNDER FOUR HOURS.
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR
TOMORROW, MORE REPORTING ON THE
TERROR ATTACKS IN LONDON AHEAD
OF THURSDAY'S ELECTIONS.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.